.TH FAIL2ZIG.TOML 5 "2026-04-21" "fail2zig 0.1.0" "File Formats"
.
.SH NAME
fail2zig.toml \- fail2zig daemon configuration file
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/fail2zig/config.toml
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fail2zig.toml
is the configuration file for the
.BR fail2zig (1)
intrusion prevention daemon. The file uses a strict subset of the TOML format.
.PP
Unknown keys are rejected with line and column context. Unknown sections are
rejected. All values are strictly typed; a string where an integer is expected
is an error.
.PP
The file is divided into three section types:
.IP \(bu 2
.B [global]
\(em daemon-wide settings (log level, socket path, memory ceiling, metrics binding).
.IP \(bu 2
.B [defaults]
\(em default values applied to every jail unless overridden.
.IP \(bu 2
.BR [jails. \fIname\fR ]
\(em one section per jail, overriding any defaults as needed.
.PP
Validate the configuration without starting the daemon:
.PP
.nf
sudo fail2zig --validate-config --config /etc/fail2zig/config.toml
.fi
.
.SH GLOBAL SECTION
.TP
.B log_level
String. One of
.BR debug ,
.BR info ,
.BR warn ,
.BR err .
Default:
.IR info .
.TP
.B pid_file
String (absolute path). PID file written on startup. Default:
.IR /run/fail2zig/fail2zig.pid .
.TP
.B socket_path
String (absolute path). Unix domain socket for
.BR fail2zig\-client (1).
Default:
.IR /run/fail2zig/fail2zig.sock .
Mode 0660; group
.B fail2zig
if that group exists.
.TP
.B state_file
String (absolute path). Ban-state file, written on clean shutdown and read at
startup. CRC32-validated; discarded on mismatch. Mode 0600. Default:
.IR /var/lib/fail2zig/state.bin .
.TP
.B memory_ceiling_mb
Integer. Hard memory ceiling enforced at the allocator level. Minimum: 16.
Default: 64.
.TP
.B metrics_bind
String (IP address). Address the HTTP metrics server binds to. Default:
.IR 127.0.0.1 .
Do not expose publicly without additional access controls.
.TP
.B metrics_port
Integer (1\(en65535). Port for the HTTP server. Default:
.IR 9100 .
The server exposes
.IR /metrics ,
.IR /api/status ,
and
.IR /events
(WebSocket).
.
.SH DEFAULTS SECTION
All keys in this section apply to every jail unless overridden in the
.BI [jails. name ]
section.
.TP
.B bantime
Integer (seconds). Ban duration for a first offense. Minimum: 1. Default: 600.
.TP
.B findtime
Integer (seconds). Sliding window for counting failures. Minimum: 1. Default: 600.
.TP
.B maxretry
Integer. Number of failures within
.B findtime
required to trigger a ban. Minimum: 1. Default: 5.
.TP
.B banaction
String. Firewall backend:
.BR nftables ,
.BR iptables ,
.BR ipset ,
or
.BR log-only .
Default:
.IR nftables .
.TP
.B ignoreip
String array. CIDR ranges and exact IPs that are never banned. Example:
.IR ["127.0.0.1/8", "::1", "10.0.0.0/8"] .
Default: empty.
.TP
.B bantime_increment_enabled
Boolean. Enable escalating ban durations for repeat offenders. Default:
.IR false .
.TP
.B bantime_increment_multiplier
Integer. Base multiplier in the escalation formula. Default: 1.
.TP
.B bantime_increment_factor
Integer. Growth rate in the escalation formula. Default: 1.
.TP
.B bantime_increment_formula
String.
.B linear
or
.BR exponential .
.I linear:
.IR "bantime × multiplier × (1 + factor × n)" .
.I exponential:
.IR "bantime × multiplier × factor^n" .
Default:
.IR linear .
.TP
.B bantime_increment_max_bantime
Integer (seconds). Cap on escalated ban durations. Default: 604800 (7 days).
.
.SH JAIL SECTIONS
Each
.BI [jails. name ]
section defines one jail. The name must be ASCII alphanumeric, hyphens, or
underscores.
.TP
.B enabled
Boolean. When false, the jail is parsed but not started. Default:
.IR true .
.TP
.B filter
String. Built-in filter name or a name resolvable via the filter registry.
Accepts hyphenated and underscore forms interchangeably. Default: empty (no
matching; a warning is logged at startup).
.TP
.B logpath
String array. Absolute paths to log files. Missing files are warned about but
are not fatal — they may appear after the daemon starts.
.TP
.B maxretry
Optional integer. Overrides
.B defaults.maxretry
for this jail.
.TP
.B findtime
Optional integer (seconds). Overrides
.B defaults.findtime
for this jail.
.TP
.B bantime
Optional integer (seconds). Overrides
.B defaults.bantime
for this jail.
.TP
.B banaction
Optional string. Overrides
.B defaults.banaction
for this jail.
.TP
.B ignoreip
Optional string array. Replaces (does not merge with)
.B defaults.ignoreip
for this jail.
.TP
.B bantime_increment_enabled , bantime_increment_multiplier , bantime_increment_factor , bantime_increment_formula , bantime_increment_max_bantime
Parsed and stored; in v0.1.0 only the
.B [defaults]
values take effect. Per-jail escalation is planned for v0.2.0.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Minimal configuration
.nf
[global]
memory_ceiling_mb = 64

[defaults]
bantime   = 600
findtime  = 600
maxretry  = 5
banaction = "nftables"
ignoreip  = ["127.0.0.1/8", "::1"]

[jails.sshd]
enabled = true
filter  = "sshd"
logpath = ["/var/log/auth.log"]
.fi
.PP
.SS SSH with exponential escalation
.nf
[defaults]
bantime                       = 600
findtime                      = 600
maxretry                      = 5
banaction                     = "nftables"
ignoreip                      = ["127.0.0.1/8", "::1"]
bantime_increment_enabled     = true
bantime_increment_formula     = "exponential"
bantime_increment_multiplier  = 1
bantime_increment_factor      = 2
bantime_increment_max_bantime = 1209600

[jails.sshd]
enabled  = true
filter   = "sshd"
logpath  = ["/var/log/auth.log", "/var/log/secure"]
maxretry = 3
bantime  = 3600
.fi
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fail2zig (1),
.BR fail2zig\-client (1)
.PP
Full reference:
.UR https://fail2zig.com/docs/reference/config/
.UE
.
.SH HISTORY
The fail2zig.toml format was introduced in fail2zig 0.1.0.
