.TH FAIL2ZIG-CLIENT 1 "2026-04-21" "fail2zig 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
fail2zig\-client \- query and control the fail2zig intrusion prevention daemon
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fail2zig\-client
[\fIglobal\-flags\fR]
.I command
[\fIcommand\-args\fR]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fail2zig\-client
is the command-line interface to the
.BR fail2zig (1)
daemon. It communicates over the daemon's Unix domain socket using a
length-prefixed binary protocol.
.PP
The client requires either root privileges (uid=0) or membership in the
.B fail2zig
group to connect. If the daemon is not running, all commands exit with code 3
and print a diagnostic message indicating the reason (connection refused,
permission denied, or timeout).
.PP
Output format is configurable: tabular (the default, with ANSI color on a
terminal), JSON, or plain tab-separated. Use
.B \-\-output json
for scripting.
.
.SH GLOBAL FLAGS
Global flags may appear before or after the command name.
.TP
.BI \-\-socket " path"
Unix socket path. Default:
.IR /run/fail2zig/fail2zig.sock .
Override when the daemon is configured with a non-default
.B global.socket_path
or when testing against a non-production daemon instance.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " format"
Output format:
.BR table " (default), " json ", or " plain .
.B table
renders box-drawing borders with ANSI color on a terminal and without on
non-terminals.
.B plain
emits tab-separated values with no borders or color, suitable for
.BR awk (1)
or
.BR cut (1)
processing.
.B json
emits compact JSON.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI color output unconditionally. Equivalent to setting a non-tty output.
.TP
.BI \-\-timeout " ms"
Command timeout in milliseconds. Default: 5000 (5 seconds). If the daemon does
not respond within this window, the client exits with code 3.
.TP
.BR \-\-version ", " \-V
Print the client version and exit. Does not contact the daemon.
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Print usage information and exit.
.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS status
Show a summary of daemon health: uptime, memory usage, parse rate, active bans,
total bans, firewall backend, and jail count.
.PP
.nf
.B "$ sudo fail2zig-client status"
+------------------------------------------+
| fail2zig v0.1.0 — running               |
+------------------------------------------+
| Uptime:      0d 0h 40m 54s               |
| Memory:      0.0 MB                      |
| Parse rate:  0 lines/sec                 |
| Active bans: 0                           |
| Total bans:  -                           |
| Backend:     nftables                    |
| Jails:       -                           |
+------------------------------------------+
.fi
.PP
.SS ban \fIip\fR [\fB\-\-jail\fR \fIname\fR] [\fB\-\-duration\fR \fIseconds\fR]
Manually ban an IP address. The
.B \-\-jail
flag names which jail the ban is attributed to (used for per-jail accounting and
for targeting the unban command). If omitted, the ban is attributed to an internal
"manual" category. The optional
.B \-\-duration
flag sets the ban duration in seconds; if omitted, the jail's configured
.B bantime
is used.
.PP
.nf
.B "$ sudo fail2zig-client ban 45.227.253.98 --jail sshd"
banned: 45.227.253.98 (jail=sshd, duration=3600s)
.fi
.PP
.SS unban \fIip\fR [\fB\-\-jail\fR \fIname\fR]
Remove a ban. If
.B \-\-jail
is specified, only the ban in that jail is removed. If omitted, the ban is
removed from all jails.
.PP
.nf
.B "$ sudo fail2zig-client unban 45.227.253.98 --jail sshd"
unbanned: 45.227.253.98
.fi
.PP
.SS list [\fB\-\-jail\fR \fIname\fR]
List active bans. With
.B \-\-jail
, filter to a specific jail. Each row shows the IP, the jail it was banned by,
the time of the ban, and the time remaining.
.PP
.nf
.B "$ sudo fail2zig-client list"
IP                 JAIL    BANNED AT             TIME LEFT
------------------------------------------------------------
45.227.253.98      sshd    2026-04-21 12:03:10   57m 43s
.fi
.PP
.SS jails
List all configured jails with their current state, active ban count, and
configured thresholds.
.PP
.nf
.B "$ sudo fail2zig-client jails"
JAIL                STATE     ACTIVE    MAX RETRY FIND TIME   BAN TIME
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
sshd                enabled   0         3         10m         5m
nginx-http-auth     enabled   0         3         10m         5m
nginx-botsearch     enabled   0         3         10m         5m
postfix             enabled   0         3         10m         5m
apache-auth         enabled   0         3         10m         5m
dovecot             enabled   0         3         10m         5m
Total: 6 jails
.fi
.PP
.SS reload
Signal the daemon to reload its configuration. In v0.1.0 this command is
implemented at the IPC level but the daemon-side handler is a stub; the daemon
logs the request and acknowledges it, but does not reload the config. A service
restart is required to pick up configuration changes.
.PP
.SS version
Print the daemon version (requires a daemon connection, unlike
.BR \-\-version ).
.PP
.nf
.B "$ sudo fail2zig-client version"
fail2zig-client v0.1.0
.fi
.PP
.SS completions \fIshell\fR
Print a shell completion script for the specified shell to stdout.
Supported shells:
.BR bash ,
.BR zsh ,
.BR fish .
.PP
.nf
.B "$ fail2zig-client completions bash > /etc/bash_completion.d/fail2zig-client"
.B "$ fail2zig-client completions zsh  > ~/.zsh/completions/_fail2zig-client"
.B "$ fail2zig-client completions fish > ~/.config/fish/completions/fail2zig-client.fish"
.fi
.PP
.SS help [\fIcommand\fR]
Print general help or help for a specific command.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /run/fail2zig/fail2zig.sock
Default Unix socket path. The socket is created by
.BR fail2zig (1)
at startup with mode 0660. Override with
.BR \-\-socket .
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
The daemon returned an error response (e.g., unknown jail name, IP not found).
.TP
.B 2
Bad arguments or invalid input (unknown command, missing required argument,
unrecognized IP address format).
.TP
.B 3
Connection failed: daemon is not running, permission denied, or command timed out.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
No environment variables are read by the client.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Check daemon health
.nf
sudo fail2zig-client status
.fi
.SS Ban an IP manually for 24 hours
.nf
sudo fail2zig-client ban 192.0.2.10 --jail sshd --duration 86400
.fi
.SS List active bans as JSON for scripting
.nf
sudo fail2zig-client list --output json | jq '.[].ip'
.fi
.SS Watch for bans in a loop
.nf
watch -n 5 'sudo fail2zig-client list --output plain'
.fi
.SS Install bash completions system-wide
.nf
sudo fail2zig-client completions bash > /etc/bash_completion.d/fail2zig-client
.fi
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fail2zig (1),
.BR fail2zig.toml (5)
.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by the fail2zig contributors.
.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/ul0gic/fail2zig/issues
.UE .
.PP
Known limitations in v0.1.0:
.IP \(bu 2
The
.B reload
command is a stub; restart the daemon to apply config changes.
.IP \(bu 2
The
.B \-\-duration
flag on the
.B ban
command is accepted but the daemon currently uses the jail's configured
.B bantime
in all cases. This will be honored in v0.2.0.
.
.SH HISTORY
fail2zig-client 0.1.0 was the first public release, April 2026.
