.TH FAIL2ZIG 1 "2026-04-21" "fail2zig 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
fail2zig \- modern intrusion prevention daemon
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fail2zig
[\fB\-\-config\fR \fIpath\fR]
[\fB\-\-foreground\fR]
[\fB\-\-validate\-config\fR]
[\fB\-\-test\-config\fR]
[\fB\-\-import\-config\fR [\fIsource\-dir\fR]]
[\fB\-\-import\-output\fR \fIpath\fR]
[\fB\-\-version\fR | \fB\-V\fR]
[\fB\-\-help\fR | \fB\-h\fR]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fail2zig
is a host-based intrusion prevention daemon. It watches log files for
authentication failures and other abuse patterns, and applies temporary IP bans
via the system firewall when a configured threshold of failures is crossed within
a sliding time window.
.PP
The daemon is a single static binary with zero runtime dependencies. All firewall
operations are performed via direct netlink communication with the kernel — no
shell, no subprocess, no \fBnft\fR or \fBiptables\fR CLI tools are invoked.
.PP
Configuration is read from a TOML file. Built-in filters for 15 common services
(SSH, nginx, Apache, Postfix, Dovecot, and others) are compiled into the binary
at build time. There is no runtime regex engine; all pattern matching is performed
by specialized functions generated at compile time.
.PP
In version 0.1.0, the daemon runs in foreground mode only. Daemonization is
planned for a future release. Run under
.BR systemd (1)
or a process supervisor.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-config " path"
Path to the configuration file. Default:
.IR /etc/fail2zig/config.toml .
The file must be valid TOML conforming to the fail2zig schema; unknown keys are
rejected with line and column context.
.TP
.B \-\-foreground
Run in foreground (log to stderr). This is the only supported mode in v0.1.0;
the flag is accepted but has no additional effect.
.TP
.B \-\-validate\-config
Load and validate the configuration file, print the result, and exit. Does not
start log watchers, does not contact the firewall backend, does not write the
PID file or state file.
.sp
.nf
.B "$ fail2zig --validate-config --config /etc/fail2zig/config.toml"
config: OK (6 jail(s) configured)
.fi
.TP
.B \-\-test\-config
Alias for
.BR \-\-validate\-config .
Retained for compatibility with early release documentation.
.TP
.BI \-\-import\-config " [source-dir]"
Import a fail2ban configuration tree and write a native
.B fail2zig.toml
file. The optional
.I source-dir
argument is the fail2ban config root; it defaults to
.IR /etc/fail2ban .
The importer reads
.IR jail.conf ,
.IR jail.local ,
.IR jail.d/*.conf ,
and
.IR filter.d/*.conf
in fail2ban's precedence order, translates the enabled jails, and writes a
migration report to stderr.
.sp
.nf
.B "$ fail2zig --import-config /etc/fail2ban"
.B "    --import-output /etc/fail2zig/config.toml"
migration: imported=3 skipped=0 filters(translated=0 builtin=3 skipped=0) \
output='/etc/fail2zig/config.toml'
.fi
.TP
.BI \-\-import\-output " path"
Destination path for the generated TOML file when running
.BR \-\-import\-config .
Default:
.IR /etc/fail2zig/config.toml .
The write is atomic: the file is written to a temporary path and renamed into
place. The parent directory is created if it does not exist.
.TP
.BR \-\-version ", " \-V
Print the version string and exit.
.sp
.nf
.B "$ fail2zig --version"
fail2zig 0.1.0
.fi
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Print usage information and exit.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/fail2zig/config.toml
Default configuration file. See
.BR fail2zig.toml (5)
for the full format reference.
.TP
.I /run/fail2zig/fail2zig.pid
PID file written on startup. Location configurable via
.B global.pid_file
in the configuration.
.TP
.I /run/fail2zig/fail2zig.sock
Unix domain socket for
.BR fail2zig\-client (1)
communication. Mode 0660, group-restricted. Location configurable via
.B global.socket_path
in the configuration.
.TP
.I /var/lib/fail2zig/state.bin
Binary ban-state file. Written on clean shutdown (SIGTERM, SIGINT), read on
startup to restore active bans. CRC32-validated; discarded on mismatch. Mode
0600, owned by root. Location configurable via
.B global.state_file
in the configuration.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success. The daemon ran and exited cleanly (SIGTERM or SIGINT), or a
non-daemon operation (
.BR \-\-validate\-config ,
.BR \-\-version ,
.BR \-\-help )
completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Configuration load or validation failure; or
.B \-\-import\-config
completed with zero jails successfully imported.
.TP
.B 2
Hard parse error during
.B \-\-import\-config
(file not found, permission denied, unrecoverable format error).
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
No environment variables are read by the daemon in v0.1.0. Systemd socket
activation environment variables (\fBLISTEN_FDS\fR, \fBNOTIFY_SOCKET\fR) are
planned for Phase 2.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Validate configuration before starting
.nf
sudo fail2zig --validate-config --config /etc/fail2zig/config.toml
.fi
.SS Import fail2ban configuration
.nf
sudo fail2zig --import-config /etc/fail2ban \\
              --import-output /etc/fail2zig/config.toml
.fi
.SS Run under systemd (manual invocation equivalent)
.nf
sudo fail2zig --foreground --config /etc/fail2zig/config.toml
.fi
.SS Cross-compile for aarch64 (from source)
.nf
zig build -Dtarget=aarch64-linux-musl -Doptimize=.ReleaseSafe
scp zig-out/bin/fail2zig user@arm-server:/usr/local/bin/
.fi
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fail2zig-client (1),
.BR fail2zig.toml (5),
.BR nft (8),
.BR systemd.service (5)
.PP
Documentation:
.UR https://fail2zig.dev/docs
.UE
.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by the fail2zig contributors. See the project repository for the full
contributor list.
.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/ul0gic/fail2zig/issues
.UE .
.PP
Known limitations in v0.1.0:
.IP \(bu 2
Daemon mode (background process) is not yet implemented; run under a process
supervisor.
.IP \(bu 2
Hot-reload (\fBfail2zig-client reload\fR) is implemented at the IPC level but
the daemon-side handler is a stub; a restart is required to pick up config
changes.
.IP \(bu 2
Per-jail bantime increment settings are parsed but only the \fB[defaults]\fR
values take effect.
.
.SH HISTORY
fail2zig 0.1.0 was the first public release, April 2026.
